---
title: If I Speak
category: misc
---
I used to write a lot. Then the internet got mean and scared me off. 

<!-- more -->

I became nervous that I would write something ignorant that would go viral, that strangers would laugh at me and I would feel embarrassed (a fate worse than death?). I also lacked conviction that I had anything worth expressing. Amongst so many people vying for a slice of attention in an increasingly distracted world, why should I bother adding to the noise? 

Now I think I lost something when I stopped writing. As I wrote less, my self esteem declined. I lost confidence in expressing myself irl. I even found that ideas flowed less freely. To share your words with others is to be vulnerable, but it’s also an act of self love. It’s a mantra: “your point of view is worthy”. 

Putting words on a page is a great way to consolidate ideas that have been bouncing around your skull. When you try to express your ideas in a coherent piece of writing, you notice flaws in your thinking and this forces you to improve the strength of your argument. Writing about the things you love becomes an expression of that love. Even more amazingly, when we write we can connect with others. We can educate, persuade, annoy, inspire. All good stuff.

As more of us are outsourcing our self expression to generative AI, I want to preserve and cultivate my voice. It feels vital to assert myself in this way. Like lifting weights, writing is a habit: use it or lose it.

This is why my New Year’s resolution is to write. This blog is where I’ll put that writing. I’m not saying that these words will be profound, but I’m hopeful that this endeavour will be worthwhile. 

Have a nice day!