---
title: The Footballer's Solution
category: football
---
I’m no athlete, but how do they do that?
<!-- more -->
I find myself saying this a lot sat on the sofa watching the perfect arc of a free kick, or an incisive line breaking pass. For me though the most mind boggling of all is the way players connect with one another. Everything needs to be aligned. The passer releasing the ball at the right moment for the recipient to run onto requires both players to coordinate in perfect sync with one another. These connections happen hundreds of times in a match. Roughly speaking, we would call the ability of players to link up with each other chemistry. While most attributes we ascribe to players are individual skills (finishing, accuracy, pace, etc), chemistry occurs within groups.

This element of the game is difficult to identify in data, but should be obvious to spot in the dressing room. I read a chapter of David Papineau’s book, Knowing the Score, that I keep thinking about.

Let me sketch it out here real quick. Papineau introduces the ‘Footballer’s Problem’ in game theory, where player A must make a pass at the same time player B makes a run to receive the ball. Let’s say each player can choose to pass/run to the left or the right. The rational choice depends on what the other player chooses to do. Without going into detail, Papineau states that the game has two Nash equilibria given that the best option a player can take depends upon the option that their teammate takes. 

Papineau proposes team reasoning as a way of not having to second guess what your teammate will do. As Papineau put it: “we want them to think of themselves as a unit, and to consider which of their joint options is best”. If everybody is thinking as a team, each player will know the move that their teammate will make: the action that maximises the group’s success.

Considering the sport through this lens brings to light some important factors influencing team performance and should be relevant to anyone seeking to understand what makes some football teams successful and others not.

One consequence of this paradigm is the potential for a new signing to disrupt the chemistry of the team. Although clearly struggling for a myriad of structural reasons, no doubt Cristiano Ronaldo’s return to Manchester United had an impact on the harmony of the team. Ronaldo’s legendary status as one of the best to ever play alongside his reputation for being, for lack of a better word, a brat, was a particularly disruptive combination. Some players, equal parts enamoured and intimidated, appeared to adopt a new guiding principle: “get the ball to Ronaldo”. I remember one particular time where Rashford ran onto a ball in the box and then appeared paralysed until the moment passed him by.

This is a somewhat controversial example, but this sort of move away from playing as a team could happen for a variety of reasons. A young player looking to establish herself in the team gets subbed on and prioritises her own highlights reel ahead of being a team player. A club legend is close to breaking a scoring record, so his teammates focus on delivering the ball to him at the expense of better options.

Peak performance involves shutting off your mind, entering a flow state ([I loved hearing Christen Press talking about this here](https://open.spotify.com/episode/3ulZcmqxDb5q9NochsAFBq?si=a6be8f73c0f94868)). Papineau’s framing suggests a sort of collective flow state that very good sports teams tap into. If the opposite of flow is the yips, it follows that a team can be afflicted with a sort of collective yips. Imagine tournament favourites that are suddenly daunted by playing in a final letting the occasion get the best of them (England Euro 2020 anyone?).

If a team is underperforming due to the collective yips, different solutions will be needed. I’m certainly not qualified to go into detail here, but a team suffering from the yips probably won’t be fixed by a shiny new signing, or by being yelled at in the dressing room. I’ll let coaches and sports psychologists fill in the details here, but this framework certainly piqued my interest. This group skill also plays a role in several key areas of the game that we seek to understand. Out of possession defensive positioning relies on a sort of group thinking, as does a well orchestrated counter attack.

I also wonder, as someone in the data space, if openly discussing a players metrics with them might undermine their ability to think as a team, overcomplicating the instructions they receive and encouraging selfishness. The idea of a player consciously choosing to take a selfish action on a pitch to maximise their own stats makes me shudder. Equally, a player nervous about losing his spot in the starting 11 might be less likely to think as part of the team. One player not employing group reasoning seems to be enough to unravel the whole endeavour.

Huge strides would be needed to create some sort of analytical framework to measure team reasoning and identify players particularly adept at working as a team. Undoubtedly there will be work out there already exploring this, whether in the public domain or in secret (as football clubs are notoriously private). [I enjoyed this article in American Soccer Analysis](https://www.americansocceranalysis.com/home/2025/1/12/chemistry-101) exploring one option for modelling chemistry in data. Modern scouting and analysis is preoccupied with identifying individual brilliance, whether through physical attributes - speed, finishing ability, control - or cognitive intelligence. I hope to spend more time exploring the social attributes players have, thinking of football as a group activity defined by relationships rather than individuals. 

[Vignesh Jayanth’s conference talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VvMQhwi7iWU&list=PLH0l8DRfBxg5vtXrXzJhqWjPhwb5Yzkdp&index=6) addressing decision making and cognitive skills in players also feels relevant here. Vignesh uses dual process theory (Kahneman!) to distinguish between automatic, instinctive actions (shooting, interceptions) and deliberate actions (spatial awareness, scanning). Group reasoning sits in an interesting space between these two processing modes. Team reasoning often appears to emerge organically in healthy teams and decisions players make as part of team reasoning are often not conscious ones. Nonetheless, it strikes me that team reasoning can be fostered over time and chemistry cultivated. 
